Feature/restart and upgrade (#296)
citusdata/pg_auto_failover: docs/operations.rst

    existing data over. The pg_auto_failover database contains the
    registration of every node in the system and their current state.

	It is not possible to trigger a failover during the monitor update.
	Postgres operations on the Postgres nodes continue normally.

	During the restart of the monitor, the other nodes might have trouble
	connecting to the monitor. The ``pg_autoctl`` command is designed to
	retry connecting to the monitor and handle errors gracefully.

  - on the Postgres nodes, the ``pg_autoctl`` command connects to the
    monitor every once in a while (every second by default), and then calls
    the ``node_active`` protocol, a stored procedure in the monitor databases.

	The ``pg_autoctl`` also verifies at each connection to the monitor that
	it's running the expected version of the extension. When that's not the
	case, the "node-active" sub-process quits, to be restarted with the
	possibly new version of the ``pg_autoctl`` binary found on-disk.

As a result, here is the standard upgrade plan for pg_auto_failover:

  1. Upgrade the pg_auto_failover package on the all the nodes, monitor
     included.

> 	 When using a debian based OS, this looks like the following command for
> 	 pg_auto_failover 1.3.1::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	 When using a debian based OS, this looks like the following command when 
	 from 1.4 to 1.5::
```

> 	   sudo apt-get remove pg-auto-failover-cli-enterprise-1.0 postgresql-11-auto-failover-enterprise-1.0
> 	   sudo apt-get install -q -y pg-auto-failover-cli-enterprise-1.3 postgresql-11-auto-failover-enterprise-1.3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	   sudo apt-get remove pg-auto-failover-cli-enterprise-1.4 postgresql-11-auto-failover-enterprise-1.4
	   sudo apt-get install -q -y pg-auto-failover-cli-enterprise-1.5 postgresql-11-auto-failover-enterprise-1.5
```

------------

It is also possible to register pre-existing PostgreSQL instances with a
pg_auto_failover monitor. The ``pg_autoctl create`` command honors the ``PGDATA``
environment variable, and checks whether PostgreSQL is already running. If
Postgres is detected, the new node is registered in SINGLE mode, bypassing
the monitor's role assignment policy.
pg_auto_failover monitor. The ``pg_autoctl create`` command honors the
``PGDATA`` environment variable, and checks whether PostgreSQL is already
running. If Postgres is detected, the new node is registered in SINGLE mode,
bypassing the monitor's role assignment policy.

.. _pg_auto_failover_security:
Upgrading pg_auto_failover
--------------------------

> Security

Reviewer: I guess this could be deleted, because security now has it's own complete page?

Author: Yes.

	that's the case, nodes will continue operating normally during the
	monitor ugprade.

  - on the Postgres nodes, the ``pg_autoctl`` command connects to the
    monitor every once in a while (every second by default), and then calls
    the ``node_active`` protocol, a stored procedure in the monitor databases.

	When upgrading the monitor, it may happen that this procedure has a new
	API contract. In that case queries from the running ``pg_autoctl`` are
	going to fail. We need to upgrade the client program so that we have the
	code that matches the monitor extension's version.

As a result, here is the standard upgrade plan for pg_auto_failover:

  1. Put all the current secondary nodes in maintenance to prevent from any
     failover to happen.

	 Run the follow SQL query on the monitor database to make sure your
	 setup current state allows for an upgrade operation to happen::

		select nodeid, nodename, nodeport, goalstate, reportedstate
		  from pgautofailover.node
		 where reportedstate = 'secondary'
		   and not exists
			  (
			   select nodeid
				 from pgautofailover.node
				where goalstate <> reportedstate
				   or reportedstate not in ('primary', 'secondary')
			  )

> 		order by nodeid;

Reviewer: It would be nice if we had a command line tool to do this. Something like:
```
pg_autoctl status --is-stable
```

And for the enable/disable maintainance queries we could have:
```
pg_autoctl enable maintainance --all
pg_autoctl disable maintainance --all
```

Or maybe something like:
```
pg_autoctl upgrade prepare
pg_autoctl upgrade finish
```

That seems nicer than telling people to connect manually to the monitor database, which usually they shouldn't do.

This might be better in a separate PR though.

Author: Good ideas, even if the exact CLI/API needs to be refined. On a first approach I'm thinking it might make sense to have those operations part of the `pg_autoctl perform` sub-commands, the main (only?) place where we initiate cluster wide operations at the moment.

Let's open a separate issue/PR for this!

Author: Thanks to restarting the "node-active" sub-process on extension version mismatch on the monitor, the upgrade procedure can be simplified down to two steps, and none of the preparation queries are needed anymore.

  1. upgrade the OS packages on every node
  2. restart the monitor

		  from pgautofailover.node
		 where reportedstate = 'secondary'
		   and not exists
			  (
			   select nodeid
				 from pgautofailover.node
				where goalstate <> reportedstate
				   or reportedstate not in ('primary', 'secondary')
			  )
		order by nodeid;

	 Check that the selected nodes have reached `maintenance` by watching
	 the output of the ``pg_autoctl show state`` command. When all selected
	 nodes are in maintenance, we can move forward with the upgrade.

	 .. note::

		Alternatively you may also run the command ``pg_autoctl enable
		maintenance`` on every secondary node.

  2. Stop the ``pg_autoctl`` service on the monitor.

	 The command to stop the systemd pgautofailover service is::

	   sudo systemctl stop pgautofailover

	 To verify that the service has been stopped as expected, we run the
	 following command::

	   sudo systemctl status pgautofailover

	 At this point all the Postgres nodes in the system are going to error
	 out every second when connecting to the monitor. In case of error to
	 connect to the monitor, the node-active process retries every second,
	 and will be able to continue normally as soon as the monitor is back
	 online.

>   3. Upgrade the pg_auto_failover package on the monitor.

Reviewer: I thought this step should be after upgrading (and restarting) pg_auto_failover on the postgres nodes. Otherwise the old pg_autoctl keeper processes will communicate with the new monitor extension. Sounds like that could mess stuff up.

Author: It's problematic in both cases in different ways. We don't guarantee API compatibility in either direction. 

What I now think we should do, given your feedback here, is to check for the monitor extension version to be as expected by the client each time we open a connection to the monitor, as the first query we do. When the version is not as expected, close the connection and return false to indicate we failed to open it, and let the main loop take over from there.

I believe that if we implement that, then you can upgrade the client pg_autoctl nodes at anytime without consequences: we would only call the API when we're on the expected version anyway, and keep retrying otherwise.

We might even be able to run `pg_autoctl version --json` and parse the result when we see that the server version is different from the current in-memory expected version, and when we see that the on-disk version is the same as the monitor version then just restart automatically?

For that we might want to add the supported monitor version in the JSON output, it's not there yet.

Author: Fixed in #318 then #316.

	   sudo apt-get install -q -y pg-auto-failover-cli-enterprise-1.3 postgresql-11-auto-failover-enterprise-1.3

  4. Restart the ``pgautofailover`` service on the monitor.

	 When using the systemd integration, all we need to do is::

	   sudo systemctl start pgautofailover

	 Then we may use the following commands to make sure that the service is
	 running as expected::

	   sudo systemctl status pgautofailover
	   sudo journalctl -u pgautofailover

	 At this point it is expected that the ``pg_autoctl`` logs show that an
	 upgrade has been performed by using the ``ALTER EXTENSION
	 pgautofailover UPDATE TO ...`` command. The monitor is ready with the
	 new version of pg_auto_failover.

  5. Upgrade the pg_auto_failover package on the Postgres nodes.

	 Use the same command as on the monitor in step 4 above.

  6. Restart the ``node-service`` service on all the Postgres nodes.

	 When using the systemd integration, restarting the ``pgautofailover``
	 service will also restart Postgres, which is not always possible. If
	 you did implement step 2, your current service is not running, so you
	 can restart it now::

> 	   pg_autoctl restart node-active

Reviewer: inconsistent use of `node-service`/`node-active`

Author: Fixed.

	Postgres operations on the Postgres nodes continue normally.

	During the restart of the monitor, the other nodes might have trouble
	connecting to the monitor. The ``pg_autoctl`` command is designed to
	retry connecting to the monitor and handle errors gracefully.

  - on the Postgres nodes, the ``pg_autoctl`` command connects to the
    monitor every once in a while (every second by default), and then calls
    the ``node_active`` protocol, a stored procedure in the monitor databases.

	The ``pg_autoctl`` also verifies at each connection to the monitor that
	it's running the expected version of the extension. When that's not the
	case, the "node-active" sub-process quits, to be restarted with the
	possibly new version of the ``pg_autoctl`` binary found on-disk.

As a result, here is the standard upgrade plan for pg_auto_failover:

  1. Upgrade the pg_auto_failover package on the all the nodes, monitor
     included.

	 When using a debian based OS, this looks like the following command for
	 pg_auto_failover 1.3.1::

	   sudo apt-get remove pg-auto-failover-cli-enterprise-1.0 postgresql-11-auto-failover-enterprise-1.0

> 	   sudo apt-get install -q -y pg-auto-failover-cli-enterprise-1.3 postgresql-11-auto-failover-enterprise-1.3

Reviewer: This upgrade procedure only works for upgrades from 1.4 to future 1.5 right? I think it's good to make that clear somewhere. Pretending like it works to upgrade from 1.0 to 1.3 seems like a recipe for problems. I'm not sure if we need to write down the pre-1.4 upgrade procedure or not, but making clear that this procedure is not the right one for pre-1.4 seems critical.

Author: Thinking more about it, I think we should still have a short version of the pre-1.4 procedure. The extra SQL queries we used to have in this document were more confusing than useful, so I re-installed something simpler where you have to run `pg_autoctl enable maintenance` on every standby node.

  2. Restart the ``pgautofailover`` service on the monitor.

	 When using the systemd integration, all we need to do is::

	   sudo systemctl restart pgautofailover

	 Then we may use the following commands to make sure that the service is
	 running as expected::

	   sudo systemctl status pgautofailover
	   sudo journalctl -u pgautofailover

	 At this point it is expected that the ``pg_autoctl`` logs show that an
	 upgrade has been performed by using the ``ALTER EXTENSION
	 pgautofailover UPDATE TO ...`` command. The monitor is ready with the
	 new version of pg_auto_failover.

When the Postgres nodes ``pg_autoctl`` process connects to the new monitor
version, the check for version compatibility fails, and the "node-active"
sub-process exits. The main ``pg_autoctl`` process supervisor then restart
the "node-active" sub-process from its on-disk binary executable file, which
has been upgraded to the new version. That's why we first install the new
packages for pg_auto_failover on every node, and only then restart the

> monitor.

Reviewer: Probably good to note here (and/or at the top of this step) that not updating pg_autoctl on Postgres nodes will result in postgres going down.

Author: Added a note about that, thanks!
